allow PRIORITY frames referring to placeholders exceeding `SETTING_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS` (#2761)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-http.md

streams long after the server had discarded state, leading to disparate views of
the prioritization the client had attempted to express.

In HTTP/3, placeholders are given their own number space that spans between zero
and 2^62-1.  By using the `SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS` setting, the server

> advertises the range of placeholder IDs it is committing to maintain state,

Reviewer: "advertises the number of placeholder IDs for which it is committing to maintain state."

Author: Thank you for the suggestions. I've applied this proposed change (with the omission of "IDs") as well as the one below in 6b8b457, at the same time reordering the sentences so that they flow better.

which is between zero and one less than the value of this setting.  Clients can

> use the placeholders within this range with the confidence that the server will

Reviewer: "can use placeholders with an ID less than the value of this setting with...."

streams long after the server had discarded state, leading to disparate views of
the prioritization the client had attempted to express.

In HTTP/3, by using the `SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS` setting, the server

> advertises the number of client-controlled placeholders it is committing to

Reviewer: "placeholders for which it is committing to maintain state." or "placeholders it is committing to maintain."

Author: :+1: done in 752df0df.

streams long after the server had discarded state, leading to disparate views of
the prioritization the client had attempted to express.

In HTTP/3, by using the `SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS` setting, the server
advertises the number of client-controlled placeholders for which it is
committing to maintain state.  Client-controlled placeholders are given their
own number space that spans between zero and 2^62-1.  Clients can use the
client-controlled placeholders with an ID less than the value of this setting

> with the confidence that the server will not have discarded the state.  The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with the confidence that the server will discarded associated state.  The
```

Question, if we have PlaceholderN->RequestN->root in a tree and RequestN has long since been discarded; is this considered "discarding the state"?

Author: If the text is unclear, maybe we should change it to something like "with the confidence that the server will retain state"? Note that the sentence is about ID being *less* than SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS.

> Question, if we have PlaceholderN->RequestN->root in a tree and RequestN has long since been discarded; is this considered "discarding the state"?

No. "State" here means the existence of the placeholder and the relationship with it's children.

Reviewer 2: Then say "that the server will not have disposed of the priority of the placeholder".

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. Applied in 47abc99 (changing "of the placeholder" to "of these placeholders").

orphan placeholder cannot be prioritized or referenced by the client.

> Servers are RECOMMENDED to support at least 32 placeholders.  Those that do not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Servers SHOULD support at least 32 placeholders.  Those that do not
```

SHOULD refrain from supporting placeholders at all, setting

> `SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS` to zero.

Reviewer 2: I find this weird.  I would strike the second sentence entirely and consider replacing it with justification for 32.

Author: This is the outcome of the discussion (see above). The intent is:
* recommend providing at least 32 placeholders
* acknowledge that 0 is a sensible value when that not possible

The rational is to make it possible for a client to create a priority tree that works reasonably well, assuming that it uses no more than 32 placeholders in these two conditions.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I understand that, but two chained SHOULD statements is hard to follow.

Mostly, I just don't agree with the conclusion of that discussion.  If I want to provide 24, that is perfectly fine, and it might be enough for most clients.  Pushing me toward advertising zero doesn't help at all.  

So I don't agree with the idea that pushing people toward 0 is needed.  They can make that decision on their own.  And it's the default, so there is plenty of encouragement already.

An implementation that wants placeholders will have to implement some number of strategies for priority.  If they get the number of placeholders they want, cool.  If not, then they have to find another strategy.

Reviewer: @ianswett was the main proponent for the "or bust" portion of this recommendation, I believe.  Want to defend the sentence?

A PRIORITY frame with Empty bits not set to zero MAY be treated as a connection
error of type HTTP_MALFORMED_FRAME.

A PRIORITY frame that references a non-existent Push ID, or a Stream ID the
client is not yet permitted to open MUST be treated as a connection error of
type HTTP_LIMIT_EXCEEDED.

A PRIORITY frame MAY reference a Placeholder ID that is equal to or greater than
the server's advertised value of the `SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS` settings.  The
server SHOULD ignore PRIORITY frames that specify such placeholders as the

> prioritized element.  The server SHOULD use the root of the tree as the

Reviewer 3: I think you want s/prioritized element/element dependency. Such that if a stream is assigned as dependent on a placeholder ID greater than SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS, then it becomes dependent on root.

Reviewer 3: NVM, you say that in the next sentence. 

Perhaps if you reorder the text to make the subject of each sentence come earlier, it will be easier to read it correctly.

Author: @LPardue Thank you for the comment. I've changed the flow of the sentences in 4579ada. PTAL.

Reviewer 3: That looks better now.

A PRIORITY frame with Empty bits not set to zero MAY be treated as a connection
error of type HTTP_MALFORMED_FRAME.

> A PRIORITY frame that references a non-existent Push ID, or a Stream ID the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A PRIORITY frame that references a non-existent Push ID or a Stream ID the
```

client is not yet permitted to open MUST be treated as a connection error of
type HTTP_LIMIT_EXCEEDED.

A PRIORITY frame MAY reference a Placeholder ID that is equal to or greater than
the server's advertised value of the `SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS` settings.  When
receiving a PRIORITY frame with its prioritized element set to such a
placeholder, the server SHOULD discard the frame without making any change to
the priority tree.  When receiving a PRIORITY frame with its element dependency
set to such a placeholder, the server SHOULD update the priority tree with the

> root of the tree being the dependency instead.

Reviewer 4: With regards to #2690, should the default be the orphan or the root? Root makes a bit more sense, since this element is clearly something the client wants to explicitly prioritize. On the other hand, this is a bit dirty, since with the orphan placeholder, nothing else gets explicitly added to the root anymore.

Author: I agree that this is debatable.

The reason I've chosen "root" as the starting point of this PR is because it is the behavior defined in HTTP/2; I think we should try to retain similarity if possible (unless / until we decide to adopt a very different design). Note that orphan placeholder is still useful regardless of this; the placeholder minimizes the negative impact when PRIORITY frames on the control stream gets lost.

Hopefully, this point becomes a less of an issue once we recommend some sensible minimum for SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS; essentially guiding servers to support either none or at least 32 (or something alike).

Reviewer: I feel like the orphan makes more sense -- just because the client is assigning *a* priority doesn't imply that it's assigning a *high* priority.  The implication would be that clients should build the priority tree with higher-priority placeholders having a lower placeholder ID.  At some point, the placeholder IDs cross the threshold of what the server supports, and everything in that tree region devolves to "after everything else."  That seems like a reasonable degradation path.

Author: > The implication would be that clients should build the priority tree with higher-priority placeholders having a lower placeholder ID.

This sounds like a good way of thinking. I agree that providing such a guidance is a better than having no guidance at all.

OTOH, That creates a dependency on #2690. @MikeBishop, should we wait for the merger of #2690 before updating the text?

Reviewer: There's an [easy solution](https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/commit/053044d622bc6854474ee88d018a2ec88f7480dd) to that.

Author: I am impressed! 18c8303 changes the dependency to the orphan placeholder.

A PRIORITY frame with Empty bits not set to zero MAY be treated as a connection
error of type HTTP_MALFORMED_FRAME.

A PRIORITY frame that references a non-existent Push ID or a Stream ID the
client is not yet permitted to open MUST be treated as a connection error of
type HTTP_LIMIT_EXCEEDED.

A PRIORITY frame MAY reference a Placeholder ID that is equal to or greater than
the server's advertised value of the `SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS` settings.  When
receiving a PRIORITY frame with its prioritized element set to such a

> placeholder, the server SHOULD discard the frame without making any change to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
placeholder, the server MAY discard the frame without making any change to
```
Note that the setting is loosely defined, as is the size of the priority tree.  A server might allow placeholders above its limit.

Author: I think I prefer "SHOULD."

Having SHOULD here, along with the recommendation that the server would support at least 32 placeholders (or zero), gives a client the chance to build a prioritization tree that works well.

Changing this to MAY makes that difficult. Consider the case where the client uses a Firefox-like priority tree a server advertises SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS of zero but in fact supports one. Having one placeholder being active while dependencies of other placeholders being assigned to root causes a nightmare.

Reviewer 2: SHOULD makes no sense.  It says that there is an interoperability requirement to put those nodes in the orphan bucket.  What does anyone gain from this?  The client is prioritizing without regard for server limits, but if the server can build a valid tree, why not let it?

Author: This certainly depends on acknowledging that servers can set SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS to zero.

If we look at HTTP/2 implementations, it is my understanding that browsers tend to give higher weight values to resources of higher precedence, regardless of their position in the prioritization tree. This works somewhat reasonably as a fallback when connecting to a server that respects the weights only, because resources of higher precedence would be given more bandwidths that those of lower precedence.

Recommending (or acknowledging) that SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS to be 0 or at least 32 allows a client implementation to consider only two ways of server prioritizing the responses: one being the server respecting the tree build by the client, the other being the tree squeezed and only the weight values being respected.

IMO knowing that the servers are likely to view the prioritization information in either of these two ways is highly preferable for enabling a client to use one design for the prioritization tree it builds _regardless of the value of SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS_, which is IMO the primary goal of this PR.

the priority tree.  When receiving a PRIORITY frame with its element dependency

> set to such a placeholder, the server SHOULD update the priority tree with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
set to a discarded placeholder, the server SHOULD update the priority tree with the
```

Note that this isn't any different than referring to a long-expired request.

Author: I am not sure if "discard" is the correct word, because placeholders are never discarded. They simply exist (or do not).

How about "nonexistent"?

Reviewer 2: Sure.

  : The default value is unlimited.  See {{header-formatting}} for usage.

  SETTINGS_NUM_PLACEHOLDERS (0x9):

>   : The default value is 0.  However, servers SHOULD set this value to 32 or

Reviewer 5: Wow, 32 is a large number.  If we keep exclusive prioritization, then Chrome will probably continue to use that, and Firefox doesn't use this many, so why such a high limit?

Reviewer 2: Just because we use 6 now, doesn't mean that we'll keep that scheme.  We're currently looking at ways to improve prioritization and placeholders are seen as being very useful in doing that.  It's very early yet, but it might be that more are found to be useful.

And 32 isn't a big number.  You need quite a few more zeros to qualify, I'd think.

Author: FWIW, I do not care much, because the amount of state required by each placeholder is much less than that required by each HTTP stream (which includes send buffers). We recommend servers supporting at least 100 concurrent HTTP streams, so 32 placeholders can be a SHOULD.

That said, I think I might prefer choosing a number that is a divisor of 100 (e.g., 20, 25).

Reviewer: Powers of two seem more natural in a protocol, but I am similarly uncaring about the specific number.

Reviewer 4: I also suggested 32 because the "power of two" feeling. Otoh, I was thinking about Patrick Meenan's setup, which requires 4 placeholders per priority level in the current scheme, allowing for 8 priority levels if the minimum number of placeholders is 32. 8 is more than e.g., the 5 chrome is using at the moment, but seems like a good number (see also SPDY priority levels).

I just want to prevent us setting this to a too low a number (e.g., 10), since that would counteract the purpose of setting a lower bound imo.

Author: While I think it makes more sense to define a number that is defined in relation to the number of concurrent requests we suggest to support, I do not think that the current value of 100 is correct (see #2787).

Considering that, I am fine with seeing this PR merged with 32 being the advice, and revisiting the advisory value if necessary.
